Polynomial Chaos.md, before:

# Polynomial Chaos in Hamiltonian mechanics 
## Part 1: Intoduction to PCE
In this series of articles, I will introduce the tecnique known as *Polynomial chaos* (PC) or *Polynomial chaos expansion* (PCE), 
and explore its application to numerical solutions of stochastic differential equations, with a focus on Hamiltonian mechanics.
Now we will cover the basic background 

> [!NOTE]
> A rigorous approach to this topic requires somewhat advanced knowledge of math, physics and statistics,
> but I would like this tutorial, focused on practical applications of numerical computing, to be useful to a wide audience of students,
> data wranglers and tinkerers from different backgrounds.
> 
> My goal will be to assume only basic knowledge of analysis and linear algebra, and to use images and code
> to explain concepts and formulas if possible.

# Examples and definitions
In this section, we recall some basic facts of (stochastic) ODEs, vector spaces, 
polynomials, and the like. Feel free to skip and consult as needed if you are already familiar with all of these terms.

## The unidimensional harmonic oscillator
Let's have a look at the equation of motion of an unidimensional oscillator, a basic ordinary differential equation[^1] from physics:

[^1]: Recall that a differential equation is similar to a standard equation, but while the solution of the latter is a 
(potentially empty) set of numbers (which may be `Int` or `Real` or `Complex`), the solution of a DE is a set of functions.
In the simpler case where there is only one independent variable with respect to which the derivative is taken (like time in our example), it is 
called an Ordinary Differential Equation.

```math
x''(t)=-kx(t)
```

Here, $x(t)$ is a function that represents the position at time $t$ of a point mass that is constrained along a unidimensional axis $\hat x$. 
The mass is tied with an idealized spring pulling towards the origin of the axis (hence the negative sign, for a positive $k$). 
The mass of the particle has been absorbed inside the constant $k$, that represents the spring's "specific strength".
The notation $x''(t)$ represents the second derivative of the position with respect to time, also known as acceleration:
```math
x''(t)=\frac{d^2}{dt^2}(x)(t)
```
This means that is is a *second-order* ODE, as it involves the second derivative of the dependent variable $x$.

> [!TIP]
> It may be conceptually useful to consider the derivative $\frac{d}{dt}(f)$ as a higher order function that takes in a standard (first order) function, such as the position
> $x(t)$, and transforms it into another function, in this case the velocity $x'(t)$. The acceleration function $x''(t)$ is then simply the output of the HO function resulting
> from the composition of the derivative with itself, ie $\frac{d^2}{dt^2}(x)(t) = \frac{d}{dt}\big(\frac{d}{dt}(x)\big)(t)$.

> [!TIP]
> More in general, during our exploration it will sometimes be useful to consider the "type" of math expressions, analogous to types in computer science. I will use a pseudo-type-annotation
> syntax that should be fairly intuitive.
>
> In this simple example, both $x(t)$ and $x''(t)$ are `Real -> Real` scalar-valued functions of (scalar) time, while the "derivative operator"
> $\frac{d^2}{dt^2}$ would have type `(Real -> Real) -> (Real -> Real)`[^2].

[^2]: A more sophisticated model could represent
the incompatibility of the units of measurements of the different types of `Real` scalar numbers above by using a kind of
newtype pattern: `x(t): Time[Real] -> Position[Real]`, `x''(t): Time[Real] -> Acceleration[Real]`,
 `d^2/dt^2(f): (Time[Real] -> Position[Real]) -> (Time[Real] -> Acceleration[Real])`

## Solutions of the ODE
The solution of the harmonic ODE is a unique $x(t)$ function, for a given *initial condition*. The initial condition is specified by the values of the function and its 
derivatives at the initial time (usually $t=0$) from which we want to start from. For a second-order ODE, we need to specify two values, the position $x_0$ and the velocity $v_0$ at $t=0$:

```math
\begin{aligned}
x'(0)&=v_0\\
x(0)&=x_0\\
\end{aligned}
```

#### Reduction to first order
We may already infer a very important trick by looking at the conditions above: we can exchange derivative orders for dimensions, in an ODE. In other words, by employing additional variables, 
we need to use only first-order derivatives to express the equation. In our example ODE, the unidimensional second order equation $x''(t)=-kx(t)$ becomes a bidimensional first-order ODE[^3] by using an additional variable $v(t)$,
the velocity of the particle:

[^3]: Note that it is still an ODE and not a Partial DE, since all derivatives are still taken with respect to the unique independent variable $t$. 
In other words, the solution of a multidimensional ordinary DE is just a collection or vector of functions depending on $t$, tracing a unidimensional trajectory in a higher-dimensional space.

```math
\begin{aligned}
  x'(t) &= v(t) \\
  v'(t) &= -kx(t)
\end{aligned}
```

Most numerical ODE solving software assumes as input in its interface a first-order ODE already reduced in this manner.

#### Exact solution
`(TODO, not focus of post)`

#### Numerical solution
We will now use Python and its associated numerical libraries to solve this ODE, as a good warmup example.
I recommend using `jupyterlab` and paste along the various code snippets (TODO: add complete notebook in repo+link).

First, let's import the required libraries:

```python
import scipy as sp
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

Now, let's define the parameters needed for our numerical solution

```python
t0 = 0.  # Initial time
tf = 15. # Final time
t_span = (t0, tf) # Time span

k0 = 2.5 # Spring specific strength
initial_position = 1. # Starting position x_0
initial_velocity = 0. # Starting velocity v_0

y0 = (initial_position, initial_velocity) # Initial values vector

# Generate times to sample the output solution at
time_steps = 10000
tcoordinates = np.linspace(t_span[0], t_span[1], time_steps) 
```

Commit message:

Update Polynomial Chaos.md
Added vec field definition

Polynomial Chaos.md, after:

# Polynomial Chaos in Hamiltonian mechanics 
# Part 1: Intoduction to PCE
In this series of articles, I will introduce the tecnique known as *Polynomial chaos* (PC) or *Polynomial chaos expansion* (PCE), 
and explore its application to numerical solutions of stochastic differential equations, with a focus on Hamiltonian mechanics.
Now we will cover the basic background 

> [!NOTE]
> A rigorous approach to this topic requires somewhat advanced knowledge of math, physics and statistics,
> but I would like this tutorial, focused on practical applications of numerical computing, to be useful to a wide audience of students,
> data wranglers and tinkerers from different backgrounds.
> 
> My goal will be to assume only basic knowledge of analysis and linear algebra, and to use images and code
> to explain concepts and formulas if possible.

# Examples and definitions
In this section, we recall some basic facts of (stochastic) ODEs, vector spaces, 
polynomials, and the like. Feel free to skip and consult as needed if you are already familiar with all of these terms.

## The unidimensional harmonic oscillator
Let's have a look at the equation of motion of an unidimensional oscillator, a basic ordinary differential equation[^1] from physics:

[^1]: Recall that a differential equation is similar to a standard equation, but while the solution of the latter is a 
(potentially empty) set of numbers (which may be `Int` or `Real` or `Complex`), the solution of a DE is a set of functions.
In the simpler case where there is only one independent variable with respect to which the derivative is taken (like time in our example), it is 
called an Ordinary Differential Equation.

```math
x''(t)=-kx(t)
```

Here, $x(t)$ is a function that represents the position at time $t$ of a point mass that is constrained along a unidimensional axis $\hat x$. 
The mass is tied with an idealized spring pulling towards the origin of the axis (hence the negative sign, for a positive $k$). 
The mass of the particle has been absorbed inside the constant $k$, that represents the spring's "specific strength".
The notation $x''(t)$ represents the second derivative of the position with respect to time, also known as acceleration:
```math
x''(t)=\frac{d^2}{dt^2}(x)(t)
```
This means that is is a *second-order* ODE, as it involves the second derivative of the dependent variable $x$.

> [!TIP]
> It may be conceptually useful to consider the derivative $\frac{d}{dt}(f)$ as a higher order function that takes in a standard (first order) function, such as the position
> $x(t)$, and transforms it into another function, in this case the velocity $x'(t)$. The acceleration function $x''(t)$ is then simply the output of the HO function resulting
> from the composition of the derivative with itself, ie $\frac{d^2}{dt^2}(x)(t) = \frac{d}{dt}\big(\frac{d}{dt}(x)\big)(t)$.

> [!TIP]
> More in general, during our exploration it will sometimes be useful to consider the "type" of math expressions, analogous to types in computer science. I will use a pseudo-type-annotation
> syntax that should be fairly intuitive.
>
> In this simple example, both $x(t)$ and $x''(t)$ are `Real -> Real` scalar-valued functions of (scalar) time, while the "derivative operator"
> $\frac{d^2}{dt^2}$ would have type `(Real -> Real) -> (Real -> Real)`[^2].

[^2]: A more sophisticated model could represent
the incompatibility of the units of measurements of the different types of `Real` scalar numbers above by using a kind of
newtype pattern: `x(t): Time[Real] -> Position[Real]`, `x''(t): Time[Real] -> Acceleration[Real]`,
 `d^2/dt^2(f): (Time[Real] -> Position[Real]) -> (Time[Real] -> Acceleration[Real])`

## Solutions of the ODE
The solution of the harmonic ODE is a unique $x(t)$ function, for a given *initial condition*. The initial condition is specified by the values of the function and its 
derivatives at the initial time (usually $t=0$) from which we want to start from. For a second-order ODE, we need to specify two values, the position $x_0$ and the velocity $v_0$ at $t=0$:

```math
\begin{aligned}
x'(0)&=v_0\\
x(0)&=x_0\\
\end{aligned}
```

#### Reduction to first order
We may already infer a very important trick by looking at the conditions above: we can exchange derivative orders for dimensions, in an ODE. In other words, by employing additional variables, 
we need to use only first-order derivatives to express the equation. In our example ODE, the unidimensional second order equation $x''(t)=-kx(t)$ becomes a bidimensional first-order ODE[^3] by using an additional variable $v(t)$,
the velocity of the particle:

[^3]: Note that it is still an ODE and not a Partial DE, since all derivatives are still taken with respect to the unique independent variable $t$. 
In other words, the solution of a multidimensional ordinary DE is just a collection or vector of functions depending on $t$, tracing a unidimensional trajectory in a higher-dimensional space.

```math
\begin{aligned}
  x'(t) &= v(t) \\
  v'(t) &= -kx(t)
\end{aligned}
```

Most numerical ODE solving software assumes as input in its interface a first-order ODE already reduced in this manner.

#### Exact solution
`(TODO, not focus of post)`

### Numerical solution
We will now show how to use Python and its associated numerical libraries to get an approximate solution for this ODE.
I recommend using `jupyterlab` and paste along the various code snippets (TODO: add complete notebook in repo+link).

First, let's import the required libraries:

```python
import scipy as sp
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

Let's define the parameters needed for our numerical solution:

```python
t0 = 0.  # Initial time
tf = 15. # Final time
t_span = (t0, tf) # Time span

k0 = 2.5 # Spring specific strength
initial_position = 1. # Starting position x_0
initial_velocity = 0. # Starting velocity v_0

y0 = (initial_position, initial_velocity) # Initial values vector

# Generate times to sample the output solution at
time_steps = 10000
tcoordinates = np.linspace(t_span[0], t_span[1], time_steps) 
```

Now, we need to define the function representing the derivative of $x$ and $v$, as function of $t,x,v$.

```python
def derivative_field(t, y, k0):
    return np.array([y[1], 
                     -k0*y[0]])
```
